Introduction
------------
ddpt is a utility for copying files like its namesake, the Unix dd command.
ddpt is specialized for files that are actually block devices. And if
those block devices understand SCSI commands then the copy can be done by
using either SCSI READ or WRITE commands (or both). This latter facility
is done using a pass-through interface that bypasses the normal operating
system block handling. This can give very fine-grained control over the
copy process.

ddpt also supports two forms of offloaded copies, one based on the EXTENDED
COPY command introduced in T10's SPC-2 standard. EXTENDED COPY is often
abbreviated to XCOPY or xcopy. As new forms of offloaded copy have been
added (especially in SPC-4) the original XCOPY is now called XCOPY(LID1)
with lot of new feature added to XCOPY(LID4). A subset of XCOPY(LID4) which
only supports disk to disk, token based copies, has the market name of ODX.
So ddpt supports the original XCOPY(LID1) and uses the term "xcopy" to
refer to it. ddpt now also supports ODX and uses the term "odx" to refer
to it.

ddptctl is a helper/auxiliary for the ddpt utility. ddptctl mainly supplies
extra functionality for ODX.

This utility was originally written for Linux. It has been ported to FreeBSD
and Windows.

Relationship to sg3_utils
-------------------------
The sg3_utils (version 1.33) package contains several utilities that mimic
the standard Unix dd command. Currently those utilities are sg_dd, sgm_dd,
sgp_dd and sg_xcopy. Even though most of the other utilities in the
sg3_utils package are ported to other operating systems, sg_dd and friends
are not ported since they are too tightly bound to Linux and some of the
idiosyncrasies of its SCSI generic (sg) and bsg drivers and the associated
SG_IO ioctl. So the ddpt utility drops some Linux specific features while
adding some more general features (e.g. write sparing). An attempt has also
been made to simplify the command line syntax which is still based on the
distinctive dd command command line syntax. Note that the dd command line
syntax is unlike any other Unix command (probably imported from some IBM
OS many years ago).

This package shares code with sg3_utils (version 1.38). With the subversion
revision control system this is done by having ddpt's "include/" and "lib/"
sub-directories pointing to the correspondingly named directories in the
sg3_utils package using the "svn:externals" property. These two "external"
directories include more files than ddpt uses. The excess files include
"lib/Makefile.am" and "lib/Makefile.in". The "Makefile.am" in ddpt's "src/"
directory does the main part of the build. When the tarball is generated
for this utility, various files are "exported" out of the subversion
repository and "svn:externals" redirection is no longer visible (but the
unused files are visible).

The ddpt executable may or may not be built depending on the libsgutils
(shared) library. Currently the ./configure rules are looking for a library
called libsgutils2.a or libsgutils2.so . In Debian those libraries are found
only in the libsgutils2-dev package, not the libsgutils2 package. If one of
those libraries is detected then ddpt will be built depending on libsgutils
(check 'ldd ddpt'). If neither of those libraries is detected at build time,
then the ddpt executable built will compile and link the relevant code from
its "include/" and "lib/" subdirectories.

Documentation
-------------
The utility outputs a usage message when the "--help" (or '-?') option is
given. Many syntax errors also result in the usage message being printed.
There is also a man page which is in section 8 (administration and privileged
commands). It can be accessed with "man ddpt" once this package is installed.
Prior to installation the man page can be viewed from this package's main
directory with "man doc/ddpt.8".

There is a web page at http://sg.danny.cz/sg/ddpt.html and a copy of that
html file is placed in the "doc" directory.

Build infrastructure
--------------------
This packages uses the automake and autoconf tools. The generating files
(scripts) are configure.ac, Makefile.am, doc/Makefile.am, src/Makefile.am and
autogen.sh .  The autogen.sh script only needs to be executed if one of the
other generating files in the above list is changed.

There is a rpm "spec" file in the main directory: ddpt.spec . There are Debian
build files in the "debian" directory and a script called build_debian.sh in
the main directory. Amongst other things debian builds are sensitive to the
value in the debian/compat file. If it contains "7" then it works on lenny and
gives warning on squeeze (but fails on the earlier etch).

The ./configure script supports these extra options:
  - '--disable-libsgutils' stops the build using the libsgutils library
    if it is found. Instead the copy of those files found under the
    include and lib directories is used.
  - '--disable-linuxbsg' drops Linux bsg driver support. This is only
    for testing and should no longer be necessary.
  - '--disable-scsistrings' excludes the asc/ascq and command name strings
    (defined by SCSI/T10) in an attempt to reduce the size of executables.

License
-------
This utility is covered by a FreeBSD license also known as the BSD 3-clause
license (see Wikipedia). The intention of the author is that both open
source and commercial entities can re-use this code. Naturally attribution
and improvement/bug feedback are encouraged.

Notes
-----
Generic information about building this package (i.e. './configure ; make;
make install') can be found in the INSTALL file. The contents of COPYING is a
FreeBSD license (rather than the GPL v2 found in the usual template).

Linux port
----------
The utility can be used on any storage device.

To use the "pt" interface the device needs to support the SG_IO ioctl. In
the Linux 2.4 series that is only the scsi generic (i.e. /dev/sg* )
device nodes. In the Linux 2.6 and 3 series the supported device nodes have
expanded to all other SCSI device nodes (e.g. /dev/sd* and /dev/sr*)
plus block devices such as /dev/hdc when the associated device is a
DVD drive. The man page and sg.danny.cz/sg/ddpt.html web page examples use
Linux device node names.

FreeBSD port
------------
See README.freebsd

Solaris port
------------
See README.solaris

Win32 port
----------
See README.win32


Douglas Gilbert
13th June 2014
